




















































Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business


IBM Services 
White Paper 

Beyond the hype:  
A guide to understanding and 
successfully implementing artificial 
intelligence within your business



2     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

Contents
 2 Introduction

 3 What is AI?

 5 How does an AI system learn?

 5 What has driven the development of AI?

 7 Where are we today with AI? 

 8 What are the areas in which AI provides the most  
value today? 

 8 What are some examples of successful implementations? 

 9 Best practices to successfully implement  
AI within an organization 

 11  Pitfalls of AI implementation 

14 Summary

15 IBM Services

18 About the authors

18 Acknowledgements

 18 Appendix

Introduction
To implement AI within your organization successfully you 
need to understand what AI is, where it currently stands, 
what value can provide to businesses and how it can be 
successfully adopted. This white paper is written for 
business leaders looking for practical advice on how to 
leverage artificial intelligence (AI) for their organizations. 

The fact that AI has been hyped doesn’t take away from its 
capabilities as a real value driver. Heavy investments have 
been made in AI across multiple industries; the Chinese 
government even made it one of their core sectors. And 
companies like IBM, Microsoft, Google and Amazon are 
leading the pack when it comes to utilizing data and AI. 

AI provides enormous amounts of value in multiple 
industries. Because of its high value potential, many 
companies have been scrambling to implement AI within 
their organizations. And the projects, when implemented 
properly, have shown significant returns and improved 
competitive edge. If your company hasn’t started 
implementing AI, it may lag behind its competitors, so it’s 
critical to evaluate what AI can do for your organization. 
But this doesn’t mean you should hire data scientists or 
acquiring data science solutions without a clear strategy. 
Implementing AI should be a carefully thought out process. 
Otherwise it may turn out to be a costly failure. 

The authors of this paper want to provide you with the 
knowledge you need to evaluate what type of AI solutions you 
can implement to give your company a competitive advantage.



IBM Services     3

What is AI?
When people hear AI they often think about sentient 
robots and magic boxes. AI today is much more mundane 
and simple—but that doesn’t mean it’s not powerful. 
Another misconception is that high-profile research 
projects can be applied directly to any business situation.  
AI done right can create extreme return on investments 
(ROIs)—for instance through automation or precise 
prediction. But it does take thought, time and proper 
implementation. We have seen that success and value 
generated by AI projects is increased when there is a 
grounded understanding and expectation of what the 
technology can deliver from the C-suite down.

We are now at the brink of the fourth Industrial Revolution. 
AI is one of the biggest facets of this revolution, and it 
will affect almost all sectors, as did previous Industrial 
Revolutions.1 AI’s abilities have increased significantly 
since its inception in 1955; it can now detect patterns 
more accurately, continuously and based on more data. 
Currently, AI has surpassed human intelligence in some 
specific domains. These domains can be split in three 
categories: general tasks, formal tasks and expert tasks. 
General tasks could include visual recognition, speech 
recognition, natural language processing and translation. 
Formal tasks are related to games where some theorem 
and learning is involved. And expert tasks are those that 
would otherwise be executed by a domain expert. (Think 
of tasks such as diagnosing disease and engineering.2) 

As already stated, AI was first named in 1955 and was 
defined as the ability of machines to perform human-like 
tasks. The term has gained popularity ever since its first 
mention. However, there is still quite a bit of confusion about 
the difference between AI, machine learning and deep 
learning—but simply stated, AI encompasses the latter two. 

AI

Artificial intelligence
A program that can sense, reason, 

act and adapt.

Machine learning
Algorithms whose performance improve 

as they are exposed to more data over time.

Deep learning
Subset of machine learning in 

which multipayered neutral 
networks learn from 
vast amount of data.

Figure 1: The distinction between AI, Machine Learning and Deep Learning.

“Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a science and a set of 
computational technologies that are inspired by—but 
typically operate quite differently from—the ways people 
use their nervous systems and bodies to sense, learn, 
reason and take action.”3 Lately there has been a big rise in 
the day-to-day use of machines powered by AI. These 
machines are wired using cross-disciplinary approaches 
based on mathematics, computer science, statistics, 
psychology and more.4 Virtual assistants are becoming 
more common, most of the web shops predict your 
purchases, many companies make use of chatbots in their 
customer service and many companies use algorithms to 
detect fraud. These are just a few of the examples of how 
AI is used every day. 



4     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

Machine learning 
Machine learning is enabling a machine to learn from data 
without explicitly programming it with rules, because it can 
learn from the data it’s given. In essence, you could build 
an AI consisting of many different rules and it would also be 
able to be AI. But instead of programming all the rules, you 
feed the algorithm data and let the algorithm adjust itself to 
improve the accuracy of the algorithm. Traditional science 
algorithms mainly process, whereas machine learning is 
about applying an algorithm to fit a model to the data. 
Examples of machine-learning algorithms that are used a 
lot and that you might be familiar with are decision trees, 
random forest, Bayesian networks, K-mean clustering, 
neural networks, regression, artificial neural networks, 
deep learning and reinforcement learning. Artificial neural 
networks and deep learning have recently become more 
common machine learning algorithms.

Implementation examples would be predicting stock market 
prices or predicting whether a customer will churn from 
your company. 

Deep learning 
Deep learning (DL) is a relatively new set of methods that 
is changing machine learning in fundamental ways. DL isn’t 
an algorithm per se, but rather a family of algorithms that 
implements deep networks (many layers). These networks 
are so deep that new methods of computation, such as 
graphics processing units (GPUs), are required to train 
them, in addition to clusters of compute nodes. 

DL works very well with large amounts data, and whenever  
a problem is too complex to understand and engineer 
features (due to unstructured data, for instance). DL almost 
always outperforms the other types of algorithms when it 
comes to image classification, natural language processing 
and speech recognition. An example would be recognizing 
melanoma or conducting machine translation, which was 
not possible using previous techniques. 

Figure 2: Deep neural network with five layers.5

Currently, the larger the neural network and the more data 
that can be added to it, the better the performance a neural 
network can provide. DL is very powerful, but it has a couple 
of drawbacks. It’s almost impossible to determine why the 
system came to a certain conclusion. This is called the 
“black box” problem, though there are now many available 
techniques that can increase insights in the inner workings  
of the DL model. Also, deep learning often requires extensive 
training times, a lot of data and specific hardware 
requirements, and it’s not easy to acquire the specific 
skills needed to develop a new DL solution to a problem.

In conclusion, there is no one algorithm that can fit or solve 
all problems. Success really depends on the problem you 
need to solve and the data you have available. Sometimes  
a problem will need a hybrid approach, where you use 
multiple algorithms to solve the problem. Each problem 
requires extensive investigation of what constitutes a 
best-fit type of algorithm. You should take into account 
transparency and how much data, capabilities and time 
you have, because some algorithms take a long time to run.

Input layer

Hidden 
layer 1

Hidden
layer 2

Hidden
layer 3

Output layer



IBM Services     5

How does an AI system learn?  
To illustrate how AI system learning works, we’ll next 
describe what a data scientist does, and what a machine 
does in the process of developing AI solutions. Later, when 
we discuss the pitfalls of implementing AI, we’ll explain 
what types of skills you’ll need to successfully build a data 
science team.  

Data scientist
The data scientist extracts knowledge and interprets data 
by using the right tools and statistical methods6. The data 
scientist first helps identify data-analytics problems. Next, 
he or she defines defines the right algorithm and tools. 
He or she cleans the data and collects the correct data for 
the problem. The next step is to define hyperparameters 
and engineer the features in a way that it fits the model. 
After the model provides output the data scientist analyzes 
and identifies patterns and trends. Then the data scientist 
communicates the results to the stakeholders.

Machine
The machine learns to recognize patterns in the data  
that it is fed to it, and then maps these patterns to future 
outcomes. The machine learns through adjusting the 
weights and biases in the network from feedback to get to 
the correct outcome. This feedback must come from a 
trainer—the data scientist. The data scientist tells the 
model what should happen and what shouldn’t happen. 
This correction is then sent back through the network and 
an error rate is computed. With each iteration, the model 
works to decrease the error rate.  

In the appendix section of this paper, we have a section 
that addresses the different types of algorithms’ learning. 
There are four main types of learning; supervised, 
unsupervised, transferred and reinforcement learning. 
While unsupervised, reinforcement and transfer learning 
show great potential, supervised learning is currently the 
type that can provide the highest economic value.

What has driven the development of AI?
With increasing computing power and more data, the 
potential value of algorithms became higher. People and 
companies saw possibilities to embed these smart systems 
into their companies to drive strategy and innovation. As 
the power of algorithms, computing and amounts of data 
increased companies started to see an increasing amount 
of use cases. AI started to become an essential value. 
Companies saw that these systems could move them closer 
to their customers, drive efficiency, enhance employee 
experience and capability, automatize tasks, decrease 
costs and improve revenue. 

But AI went through some lulls and spikes before it became 
capable of enabling so many benefits. At a certain point the 
general public gave up on AI and machine learning as a whole, 
which stalled developments and investments. For instance, 
when Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
worked together with Carnegie Mellon to implement speech 
recognition for their pilots, they cut the project in 1974 after 
having spent millions of dollars on it. From the 1960s to 1974, 
the main funding for AI came from governments. But after 
1974 there was barely any government funding because 



6     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

of multiple failed AI projects, so the belief in the feasibility of 
AI declined. But after this period, improvements in efficiency 
lead to successful business cases, once again proving 
value. Today we now see AI as one of the big value drivers 
for companies, and to compete most companies must adopt 
AI strategies. Three topics have made AI available for many 
companies right now:  

 — The evolution of data: A factor contributing to the 
massive adoption of AI is the exponential growth of 
available data. With the introduction of the Internet, 
social media, proliferation of sensors and smart devices, 
and the fact that data storage became cheaper, it became 
more accessible than ever before. 

 — The evolution of algorithms: Algorithms have been 
around since we could write. Recently, the development 
of more advanced algorithms has helped AI become 
more powerful and efficient.

 — The evolution of computing: Another major factor in 
AI’s current success is its computing power. Back when 
AI was just beginning to be developed, the computing 
power was minimal. Computers nowadays can take much 
more data and heavier algorithms than in the 1950s. 

These developments would not have taken place without 
significant investments and proven business value.

Figure 3: AI timeline.7 

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Turing publishes the Turing-test. “The point at which a machine 
has answers like a human”

AI first named by John McCarthy

“First” AI algorithm Logic Theorist by Simon and Newell

Rosenblatt invents the first self learning algorithm with 
the perceptron

IBM 305, the first hard drive, 5 MB

Backpropagation, one of the most important areas of a neural 
network, is proposed 

IBM 1330, 100MB

Intel produces second generation general purpose chips
First AI winter, the belief in machine learning and AI had dropped 
after multiple unsuccessful experiments combined with insufficient 
computing power, network capabilities and database capacity

IBM 0665 hard drive, 40 MB. But much smaller than the 1330

First convolutional neural network developed 
(used a lot in image recognition)

The internet is open for the public

First versions of  natural language solutions set up. 

IBM’s deep blue defeats Kasparov in Chess

Google’s Page rank is published

The adoption of Internet by the masses 

Amazon brings cloud computing to the masses

Google develops an algorithm that can handle large amounts 
of data faster.

Stanford Robot drives automatically

IBM introduces Watson. A question answering machine that 
later wins from a Jeopardy champion

Worldwide IP traffic exceeds 20 exabytes (20 billion gigabytes)
per month

Facebook gets a billion users

There are more mobile devices than humans in the world

Project debater of IBM shows ability to process very large data 
sets, including millions of news articles across dozens of subjects, 
and then turn snippets of arguments into full flowing prose—a 
challenging task for a computer

1950

1955

1956

1957

1958

1969

1970

1974

1974-1980

1985

1989

1991

1992

1997

1998

2000

2002

2004

2005

2006

2010

2012

2014

2018



IBM Services     7

Where are we today with AI? 
We can split the term AI into three categories: general, 
broad and narrow. General AI encompasses all the human-
like capabilities, whereas narrow AI can only do a certain 
task—and it can do it quite well—but narrow AI can’t 
transfer its knowledge to different sorts of problems. 

Narrow AI
Narrow AI is focused on addressing very focused tasks 
(such as buying a book with a voice-based device) based 
on “common knowledge.” That’s the reason narrow AI is 
scaling very quickly in the consumer world where there are 
a lot of common tasks and data to train these systems. 
Narrow or weak AI is, contrary to the naming, very powerful  
at routine jobs. 

Figure 4: The three categories of AI.

Narrow

2010-2015

Broad  
(AI for Enterprise)

We are here

General AI

2050 and beyond

Broad AI
What we see today in self driving cars is still defined as narrow 
AI. You can see it as a collection of narrow AI systems that 
make decisions. This is what we call broad AI. Another 
example of broad AI includes a system within a bank that 
analyzes the balance sheet of corporate customers to 
recommend the best currency hedging strategy. Another 
example would be a system that supports engineers who 
work on complex maintenance tasks on a platform in the 
middle of the Atlantic Ocean. Broad AI is about integrating 
AI within a specific business process of an enterprise where 
you need business- and enterprise-specific knowledge and 
data to train this type of system. These tasks are very different 
from the narrow AI used in the consumer world because the 
data and knowledge available in the enterprise are much more 
limited in terms of volumes, very industry specific and in most 
of the cases private (for example owned by an enterprise). 
This is what we believe is currently the most valuable type of 
AI currently for the enterprise. 

General AI
General AI is far from reaching its potential. The expectations 
are that it will take at least another couple of decades. General 
AI refers to machines that can perform any intellectual task 
a human can. Currently AI does not have the ability to think 
abstractly, strategize and use previous experiences to come 
up with new creative ideas as humans do.

Some people think we will have general AI in a couple of 
decades others like IBM’s Rob High and Google’s Peter Norvig 
believe we don’t need broad AI at all.8



8     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

What are the areas in which AI provides 
the most value today?
While relevant AI use cases span various areas across 
virtually every industry, there are three main macro domains 
that continue to drive the adoption as well as the most 
economies across businesses. They are:

 — Cognitive engagement: Involves how to deliver new ways 
for humans to engage with machines, moving from pure 
digital experiences (such as the ability to run transactions 
digitally) into human-like natural conversations.

 — Cognitive insights and knowledge: Addresses how to 
augment humans who are overwhelmed with information 
and knowledge.

 — Cognitive automation: Relates to how to move from process 
automation to mimicking human intelligence to facilitate 
complex and knowledge-intense business decisions.

What are some examples of successful 
implementations?
There’s a vast amount of problems AI is already addressing 
to deliver business value across the three macro domains 
described in the previous section. We want to explain  
a couple of use cases our IBM team has successfully 
completed to demonstrate where AI can bring value.

Manufacturer: engine anomaly detection using  
a neural network 
Using the many different available sensor measurements 
from large truck engines, a neural network was trained to 
recognize normal and abnormal engine behavior. In the 
huge, high dimensional (many variables) dataset the 
neural network learned the natural correlations and 
relationships between all different readings. The resulting 

model was able to predict “normal” values given certain 
operating conditions and could thus also be used to detect 
when specific measurements were out of the ordinary. 
Anomalous sensor readings are highly predictive of 
pending engine failures.

Car manufacturer: predictive failure detection for welding 
robots and predictive maintenance assessment
Through supervised learning techniques, predictive models 
were developed that could provide an early warning of 
failure based on the different system messages and sensor 
readings that continuously stream from the production line. 
This early warning could be used to prioritize maintenance 
and reduce both downtime as well as false positives and 
needless efforts. Working through this first proof of value, 
the data scientists uncovered many data quality challenges 
that could be worked around to realize more value.

Figure 5: The most valuable AI implementations.

Designing and 
delivering new 

customer engagement

Cognitive  
engagement

Elevating and  
scaling knowledge  

and expertise

Cognitive  
insights &  

knowledge

Designing and 
delivering agility and 
operational efficiency

Cognitive  
automation



IBM Services     9

Utility company: micro-grid energy forecasting and 
production mix optimization
The output of machine learning-based predictive models 
with prescriptive, mathematical optimization models to 
prescribe the optimal mix of power production sources to 
meet predicted demand and to minimize costs. This required 
both the prediction of demand as well as prediction of 
available solar and wind energy capacity.

Material producer: insights dashboard
IBM worked with the client’s sourcing experts to understand 
the business dynamics and create inventory of possibly 
relevant data sources. Several machine learning models 
were then trained to learn the price behavior and forecast 
future price development. The models also enabled 
buyers to evaluate their own “what if” scenarios. This was 
further supplemented with IBM® Watson Discovery News 
service, which identified the most relevant news articles 
related to the material of interest. This all came together 
for the user in an interactive dashboard to consume the 
insights and interact with the data and models to make 
buying decisions.

Best practices to successfully  
implement AI within an organization 
Let’s discuss what you need to do before implementing AI. 
Currently, many companies are scrambling to implement AI 
within their environments because they believe it will keep 
them ahead of the game—which, if thought through, is the 
case. But here are a few steps you need to take.

We’ve defined three main steps to implement AI in your 
company. These steps are:

 — Develop an AI strategy and roadmap
 — Establish AI capabilities and skills
 — Start small and scale quickly

Develop an AI strategy and roadmap
First, it’s important to understand AI and to research what 
it can and can’t do for your organization. You can get more 
familiar with AI by collaborating with a data scientist, because 
it’s important that the C-level has a good understanding of  
AI and its implementation difficulties before they define 
where and how to implement. What often happens if AI 
is not holistically understood the overall project won’t 
provide value.

Once AI is understood, the next question you should ask 
yourself is: “What specific problem do I want to solve, or what 
opportunity do I want to take?” Is your company looking to 
drive efficiency in the back office, differentiate its digital 
proposition, generate new revenue streams by leveraging 
customers’ insights or even reinvent its entire business? 



10     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

After having thought this through, you’ll probably have 
many different use cases. At this point, it’s critical to 
prioritize these cases into a transformation roadmap that 
covers both a long-term vision as well as concrete feasible 
quick wins. Next, you should think about what data you 
have available. To solve most of the problems with AI you 
need to have relevant data. Without data, AI will not provide 
any value. For many companies it’s a task in and of itself 
to keep track of the type of data—as well as where it’s 
stored and in what way. Often the first step will be to 
understand the data you currently have and the type you 
need to implement your AI case.

Establish AI capabilities and skills
AI requires a completely new set of capabilities and skills 
which may be in short supply in your organization. To build 
the required in-house AI skills, it’s important to plan, 
establish and grow a dedicated Center of Competence or 
leverage the IBM Garage concept to perform in partnership. 
Not only this dedicated team is important, but you also 
need to assure the right mindset and way of working in the 
rest of the organization. It’s critical that these functions 
occur in conjunction with developing and integrating an AI 
platform within your current IT architecture to implement 
and scale AI.

Start small and scale quickly
 — Start with minimal valuable products (MVPs)  
In this phase you want to bring in experts to help quickly 
develop solutions to your business problems. This can 
only be done once the before-mentioned steps are 
completed and the business is ready organizationally 
and technologically. This also means that the experts 
you bring in should be both business and technologically 
savvy. A good duration for a MVP is normally between two 
and three months. Our experience shows that starting 
with large-scale, complex and very long AI implementation 
projects normally lead to failure. 

 — Set understandable key performance indicators (KPIs) 
To make sure that a project will succeed, you need to 
define KPIs that are understandable for your business—
including employees and other stakeholders. These KPIs 
will help you evaluate whether a project is successful. In 
general, we suggest taking a second look at these KPIs 
after an appropriate duration to decide whether the 
project is successful or if you should discontinue it. If 
your business can’t pinpoint the right KPIs to measure 
success, the project is too complex.

 — Roll-out through company (culture) 
Once agreement is reached about which projects would 
be worth working on, it’s time to implement the MVP 
within your company. It’s important that the way you 
implement it is looked at from both the business and 
the technical side. 



IBM Services     11

Pitfalls of AI implementation
With the experience of implementing many of these  
cases we normally see a couple of problems organizations 
have when implementing AI. We’ve listed them because 
we feel it’s important to know what you should consider 
when implementing AI. 

Culture
Pitfalls: Looking at the advances we’ve made over the last 
decade, gathering data is easy. But it’s what’s done with 
the data that provides the most value. The biggest pitfall 
we often encounter is a culture that’s not committed to 
making data-driven decisions. Examples are cultures that 
can’t innovate in an agile fashion or can’t leave room for 
trial and error, as are cultures that have traditionally been 
unwilling to transform a process. This reluctance usually 
has to do with fear of job loss, skepticism or a knowledge 
gap. It’s a challenge to get your organization ready to 
embrace a data-driven culture, and for many of your 
employees it can feel like a counter intuitive process. 

Recommendation: Digital change management, training 
and preparation for the shift in thinking is required. You 
should start with small wins that are visible for relevant 
departments. The business users should be your starting 
point for agile development and in your design thinking 
process. All the results that come out of the project should 
be measurable; this way you can easily show your wins. 
Then, for a data-driven culture to take hold, the whole 
organization must embrace it. The message must be clear 
for all employees: “Decision are made based on data.”

Building trust within the company
Pitfalls: This step is often overlooked, but when you want 
to implement AI you need get project stakeholders involved 
and on board. In Design Thinking, IBM starts with the 
business and its users. A data scientist will require domain 
knowledge and access to data, and the stakeholders should 
accommodate this need to help to speed up the process. 
Also, consider the need for AI education and devote time 
to considering the right user interface. 

Recommendation: Use a form of change management to 
establish user adoption. IBM’s best practice is to leverage 
its digital change approach to involve the users in the 
development of the project through studio’s in which we 
envision and co-create together. AI is not something 
everyone will be able to grasp immediately. Working with 
AI should therefore be carefully implemented in the 
business environment. 

Expectation management
Pitfalls: In many cases we work on, we see that employees 
or other stakeholders don’t believe in AI or think it’s a magical 
box we take from our office that will quickly solve all the 
problems a company. This leads to disappointment when 
an AI project is not delivered in a short timeframe or if it 
doesn’t deliver the expected results. And this disappointment 
can lead to a lack of belief that will eventually diminish 
the will to implement AI and experience the benefits of its 
long-term possibilities. 

Recommendation: Start with developing a solid strategy 
and roadmap. Define where you need to go and what you 
need to add to the organization to get there. First steps 
often include mundane items such as data governance and 
warehousing, but you need to take these steps to properly 
implement AI. It’s therefore important to implement proper 
change management to guide the company.  



12     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

Bad data
Pitfalls: One problem we often come across is bad-quality 
data. This problem derails, limits and complicates many 
machine learning and AI projects. Bad or “dirty”data can 
mean fields are missing, that there are duplicates in the 
data, or that it’s outdated data, contains spelling or 
punctuation errors and is generally incorrect. As we are 
moving toward more data-driven decision making in 
enterprises, it’s absolutely essential to have clean data. 
Outcomes derived from bad data will lead to incorrect 
decision making.  

Recommendation: To overcome incorrect decision making 
based on bad data we suggest the enterprise incorporate 
standardization of data, monitoring of data, cleaning of 
incoming data and a centralized control of data. 

Sponsorship
Pitfalls: When implementing an AI strategy, it’s important 
that the right people, such as department heads, CxOs or 
managers support the project. Implementing AI through the 
organization can be a long process, and without support of 
the right people there’s a higher probability that the project 
will fail. What you might see when this problem occurs is 
that your employees might not put enough time into problem 
definition and subject knowledge sharing. 

Recommendation: Align the right people before you start 
in a “garage” concept. The key stakeholders should be 
identified and should bring input and willingness to the 
table. Create buy-in and support with employees, other 
stakeholders, management and C-suite.

Lack of capabilities 
Pitfalls: Many companies want to implement machine 
learning right off the bat. But to implement AI, you need to 
look at two things: the first is acquiring or outsourcing your 
own data science talent, and the second is looking at your 
current IT infrastructure. 

If you choose the in-house route, you’re taking a more 
challenging route. This option can be very rewarding but 
it’s important to take in account that it will require more 
time to set up infrastructures, pipelines and research. If 
you decide to take this route, you’ll need to acquire the 
following skills in house:  

 — Researchers to create new solutions to your products
 — Project managers to keep the team on track
 — Domain experts who have knowledge about your 
products, customers and the business environment 
surrounding the product

 — Data engineers and machine learning engineers who 
can scale the algorithms 

 — Data analysts who can process the outcome
 — Statisticians to help ensure quality results
 — Software engineers to turn all you’ve created into 
something that can be used by the masses—be it your 
customers or your employees 

While these roles don’t all need to be filled by individual 
employees, it’s essential to have all these skills in house. 

The second option is easier and quicker to implement. In 
this case you’d make use of the capabilities of an external 
party such as through the IBM Garage offering, which can 
give you the ability to use these capabilities without having 
to set up a complete internal department. 



IBM Services     13

Recommendation: Before starting an AI project, you should 
evaluate the capabilities you currently have inhouse, and 
then define the cost you’ll occur acquiring the capabilities 
needed to close any gaps. Then you can define whether you 
want to hire these capabilities internally or use an external 
experienced resource to access the required capabilities.

Scalability 
Pitfalls: To properly scale the correct architecture, 
integration and employees that know how to use them 
need be in place. Many data scientists believe that the 
research and development (R&D) of a data science project 
is similar to a scaled IT implementation, yet the two are 
very different. Also, because there is increasing enterprise 
demand for AI, organizations want to analyze large amounts 
of data. This can require quite a bit of time to train an 
algorithm—days or even weeks depending on the amount 
of data involved. We still encounter data scientists trying 
to perform this function on their laptops.9 

Recommendation: Develop a plan to set up the correct  
AI architecture, a platform to deploy to, a data integration 
strategy and properly trained data scientists.

Not enough (available) data 
Pitfalls: Data availability depends on the company and on 
how it stores data. Some organizations have the data but 
don’t have it readily available. Large corporations are 
challenged to locate and keep track of the right data. 
Smaller companies may be challenged by the amount of 
data they produce. 

Recommendation: Not all problems need machine learning 
and AI. If you find yourself in a situation where you don’t 
have enough data, you should carefully consider if you 
should launch your product using machine learning. If you 
choose that option but don’t have enough data, you can 
overcome the problem by acquiring external data or by 
using simpler models.

Unlabeled data 
Pitfalls: A common problem when implementing AI is data 
that’s not classified by humans or machines, which leaves 
you unable to train the system (in the case of a supervised 
algorithm). For instance, if you wanted to predict fraud, but 
the historical fraudulent cases weren’t labelled, it would be 
impossible for the algorithm to map input to outputs. 

Recommendation: In this case, define what data you’ll 
need to run a sound model. This data will then need to 
be labeled—which can be expensive—or you can use 
algorithms to accomplish this task. It’s a more advanced 
technique, but you can use reinforcement learning or 
semi-supervised models. Your data scientist might know 
which approach is best.

Explainable results 
Pitfalls: In many cases, the business wants and needs to 
know why specific outcomes occur. This is in line with one 
of IBMs principles for ethical use of AI is: AI systems must 
be transparent and explainable. Depending on what kind 
of algorithm is used, an AI can’t show exactly which 
variables brought it to a given conclusion. We call these 
black-box algorithms. While they sometimes may perform 
better, they don’t give a lot of explanation. For example, 
you might have an algorithm that defines whether an 
applicant gets a loan. According to European law in some 
countries, if you deny the applicant, you need to explain 
why you did so. 

Recommendation: There are several new algorithms that 
help explain what happens in the black-box models such  
as Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic (LIME).10 But this 
doesn’t solve the problem in all cases. You should therefore 
define what you’re going to use the model for. If the model 
needs to explain precisely why it came to a certain conclusion, 
your data scientists should consider other models that provide 
the specific information required. Ethics and AI should go 
hand-in-hand.



14     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

Summary
AI has the potential to bring a lot of value to your company 
if thought through and implemented properly. The authors 
of this paper hope we’ve made it clear how you can achieve 
this goal. We’ve discussed what AI is what it can do for your 
organization, how it should be implemented and what pitfalls 
you should avoid once you’ve decided to implement AI. 

To sum up this paper’s key points:

AI not something of the future, it is real today, and it fuels 
the fourth Industrial Revolution: As you will see later in this 
paper, there are many cases where AI is being successfully 
implemented and driving competitive advantage. Companies 
such as IBM, Nvidia, Twitter, Delta Airlines, Walmart, Netflix, 
Spotify and Kreditech show that their data-driven approach 
produces extremely valuable business models. But for many 
companies, failing to implement a data-driven strategy can 
lead to lost market share. 

Properly implementing AI requires careful evaluation and 
planning: You need to evaluate how AI can help solve your 
problems, where your company is right now in terms of 
capabilities and what needs to be done before you can 
properly implement AI to address the problems you want 
to solve or the opportunities you want to take. 

There is no one magic algorithm that can solve all your 
problems: Before implementing AI, you should focus on 
the problems you have and how AI can help you solve 
them. Next, you need to check whether the data you need 
to solve your problems is available. Often a hybrid between 
algorithms can be the right fit, depending on the problems 
you want to solve. 

Supervised learning provides the most economic value: 
Supervised learning is currently the most applied form of 
learning and provides the most value for a wide variety of 
applications. When beginning to implement AI in your 
enterprise, you’ll likely be working with supervised learning.

In the next section of this paper, we’ll talk about how IBM 
can play a role in implementing AI within your organization. 
IBM not only has many years of experience with these types 
of projects but has also been a pioneer in the AI arena. Based 
on its experience and knowledge, IBM can help companies of 
all sizes implement AI solutions.  



IBM Services     15

IBM Services
IBM has the experience and knowledge to help guide your 
company through a business and technology transformation. 
IBM puts this into practice through the “garage” concept. 
The IBM Garage lets you experiment with big ideas, acquire 
new expertise and build new enterprise-grade solutions 
with modern and emerging technologies for immediate 
market impact. 

IBM looks at implementing AI in a holistic way. You as  
a client and IBM can enter into a strategic alliance to 
transform your business by creating a platform for 
continuous innovation. The IBM Garage lets you innovate 
and develop with the speed of a start-up, at the scale and 
rigor of an enterprise. It offers an innovation space where 
clients and IBM work side-by-side to create first-of-a-kind 
strategies and solutions. You can then develop the 
expertise to transform the way you work.

Figure 6: The IBM Garage for AI.

The IBM Garage as the engine for a Cognitive Enterprise transformation

Build and recruit capability: key 
profiles, roles, competences & 
responsibilities with the use of 
an AI Academy

AI capability 
development

Information technology 
supporting the AI 
infrastructure, data and tools

Technology

Design and implement 
model to measure and 
develop performance

Performance 
management

Operating model + integration 
for think, transform and thrive Operating model 

Current state assessment 
moving to strategic direction 
and guiding principles. 
Implementation roadmap

Ambition & roadmap

Change and integration 
management, culture 
strategy alignment 

Change 
management & 
communication

Service line functional scope, 
Geo, BU, process, growth 
model, country support 

Organization 
structure 
governance

Design, validate, transform. 
Includes demand 
management, prioritisation, 
delivery methodology, 
assurance and value 
management, KPI definition

Demand 
generation

IBM Garage 
for AI



16     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

Figure 7: The IBM stages of implementing AI.

Plan on a page to start the journey with the IBM Garage for AI

THINK

Set ambition 
and organization

Drive demand 
and innovate

TRANSFORM

Drive to 
production

THRIVE

Scale up

The “Think” phase is a process dedicated to thinking, 
experimenting, and proving, with the end user at the heart 
of your innovation. We start with ideas and get to working 
concepts fast, incorporating feedback in real time.

IBM helps you get prepared first, in a fast, pressure-cooker 
environment. This helps you to kickstart your AI journey. 
IBM works with you to deliver an assessment of your 
current AI capabilities. 

In assessing your current AI capabilities, IBM looks at 
many different aspects, some of which are:

 — Systems: What does your innovation system look like?
 — People: How skilled is your staff in AI?
 — Organization: How do you position AI expertise in  
your organization?

 — Culture: Do you operate in an agile fashion?
 — Data: How readily available is your data?
 — Technology: Does your current architecture enable AI?

IBM works with you to define your AI Ambition as a high-
level AI strategic direction by looking at “big ideas” and 
by reflecting on persona’s and their user stories. A persona 
can be a marketing manager or a product developer. This 
ambition is translated into a roadmap and a high-level 
business case. IBM also supports you to select the most 
favorable operating model to move forward.

Once you are prepared for your garage, IBM uses design 
thinking to identify and define use cases. All use cases are 
conceived based on the notion of creating business value. 
In IBM’s experience, design thinking is the most effective 
way. This so-called “demand generation” for the garage 
should be on-going, creating the backlog and setting the 
capacity planning for the garage. 



IBM Services     17

Once the first use cases have been agreed, the garage 
provides the playground for deep technology, accommodating 
enterprise-scale ways of working—such as design thinking, 
agile, DevOps and lean IT. Innovation starts with a Proof 
of Value (POV): evaluating the business and technical 
feasibility of the use case in a time-boxed agile manner. 
Agile development is at the core of what IBM does in the 
garage. The goal is to succeed or fail quickly, with speed  
to scale. Flexibility and speed are key! A successful POV will 
move into a pilot implementation. The IBM Garage leverages 
IBM’s extensive asset library to more efficiently validate use 
cases and accelerate transformative change. 

Organizations should be prepared to step out of their comfort 
zones and think differently. Thinking in a data-driven and AI 
approach requires a shift in the way we see. It takes some 
effort to change our ways of thinking. This is where digital 
change management plays a role. You also need to consider 
the buildup of AI capabilities in your organization. IBM 
offers various forms of training and enablement ranging 
from Hackathons, planned learning universities for 
upskilling and an AI learning academy.

In the “Transform” phase, IBM collaborates with experts, 
data and emerging technologies, using accelerators to 
build minimum, viable products into production and realize 
business outcomes and customer adoption within weeks.

The third and last phase is the factory “Thrive” phase, which is 
designed to rapidly scale solutions while establishing methods 
and new ways of working across your enterprise that can last 
a lifetime. The thrive phase works as a managed service to 
embed and maintain data and AI solutions at scale. Using a 
factory-like approach, you put into production something you 
want to be consistent in design and quality, and that doesn’t 
require innovation in execution. IBM focuses on successful 
delivery of projects aligned to the roadmap and AI platform 
technology and helps ensure a clearly defined governance. 

Using this method, IBM has been successful many times 
and wants to keep improving the method with each project 
delivered. IBM is one of the frontrunners of AI and AI 
implementation, and thrives on applying its knowledge and 
experience to help improve the world.



18     Beyond the hype: A guide to understanding and successfully implementing artificial intelligence within your business

About the authors
Jorn Jansen Schoonhoven, a data scientist at IBM with two 
years of data science experience is part of the Advanced 
Analytics branch of the IBM Amsterdam office, and part of 
the IBM Global Institute of Business Value team. He holds 
a master’s degree in business analytics and big data, and a 
master’s degree in management from IE Business School. 
He is the main author of this paper and can be reached at 
Jorn.Jansen.Schoonhoven@ibm.com or +316 22403033.

Marloes Roelands is an Associate Partner with over 20 years’ 
experience in consulting. She is the European leader for the 
“IBM Garage for AI.” She loves making innovation happen 
with her clients and followed the Executive programme 
“Strategy and Innovation” at Saïd Business School at Oxford 
University to support her thinking. She also holds a Master of 
Economics from Erasmus University Rotterdam. She can be 
reached at marloes.roelands@nl.ibm.com.

Francesco Brenna, an Executive Partner with over 17 years of 
consulting experience, currently leads the AI practice for IBM 
Global Business Services in Europe. He holds a Bachelor of 
Science in Computer Science from Zurich University of Applied 
Sciences in Zurich and a Master of Business Administration 
(with distinction) from Warwick Business School. He can be 
reached at francesco.brenna@ch.ibm.com. 

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the advanced analytics practice for 
sharing their experience about the implementation of AI, 
the IBM Institute for Business value for their advice and 
insights, and other IBM branches whose insights are 
reflected in this document. 

The authors are also grateful for the contributions of many 
IBM colleagues. In particular, they thank Mando Rotman, 
Wouter Oosterbosch, Damian Brennan and Vanessa van de 
Vliet. This report would not have been possible without the 
help of many other colleagues within the IBM Watson and 
advanced analytics department. 

Finally, special thanks go to Apostolos Mourouzis and 
Patricio Fernandez Weisson. 

Appendix
Different types of learning
Learning. which is one of the fundamentals of artificial 
intelligence and machine learning, is when the algorithm 
improves itself by looking at the data provided. There are two 
elements involved: knowledge and feedback. Knowledge 
provides information that’s already in the data, and the 
algorithm can learn from feedback through interactions with 
the user. This happens when a user gives the model feedback 
about correct or falsely predicted outcomes. There are four 
types of machine learning: supervised, unsupervised, 
reinforcement and transfer. Currently the most often used 
type is supervised learning, and thus we can say that the 
most economical value is created within this category.

mailto:Jorn.Jansen.Schoonhoven%40ibm.com?subject=Beyond%20the%20hype
mailto:marloes.roelands%40nl.ibm.com?subject=Beyond%20the%20hype
mailto:francesco.brenna%40ch.ibm.com?subject=Beyond%20the%20hype


IBM Services     19

Supervised learning is a learning method that maps an input 
to an output using human data and feedback to improve. A 
data set is provided with associated correct labels to the 
data. An example would be pictures of animals in which all 
pictures were correctly labelled as the animal in the pictures. 
Supervised learning trains based on historical data and 
builds rules that can be applied to predict future problems. 
The better the data set, the better the output. 

You may use this type of learning when you want to classify 
or predict outcomes. With regression, you are predicting a 
continuous value (“How much will the stock price be?”). 
With classifying, you are assigning a label to an input (“Is 
this picture a man or a woman?”). Other examples would 
be using speech recognition to examine the sentiments of 
people calling your customer service center, or image 
recognition to define products in a warehouse so they 
could be properly sorted.

Unsupervised learning occurs when the algorithm is not 
given a specific “wrong” or “right” outcome. Instead, the 
algorithm is given unlabeled data. Unsupervised learning 
is often used when you want to classify data but don’t know 
how to do so. For example, you’d likely use unsupervised 
learning if you had a set of customer data and you didn’t 
know what kind of classes they would fit in. An unsupervised 
learning algorithm can find natural groupings of similar 
customers in a database and the user can then describe  
and label them.

Reinforcement learning is a class in and of itself; it is not 
given a specific goal, but rather learns from trial and error. 
The main concept is that instead of a specific action being 
labelled, there is a sequence of actions that is associated 
with a reward. If we take a maze as an example, the 
algorithm will be rewarded when it comes closer to its goal 
and be penalized every time it gets stuck or moves away 
from the completion. A recent example of reinforcement 
learning is AlphaGo, where Google trained a deep 
reinforcement learning network with many examples of 
the game Go, eventually making its performance superior 
to that of even the best human. This trick is not new, since 
it was used in TD-Gammon in 1992, created by Gerald 
Tesauro at IBM. TD-Gammon was a backgammon-playing 
program that reached the performance of the best human 
players at the time.

Reinforcement learning is not currently widely used, but it 
does have high potential when developed more extensively. 
You would need a lot of data (which is not always the case 
and takes time to process) to be able to make reinforcement 
learning work.

Transfer learning is when your algorithm learns to solve 
one problem, takes information from this problem and then 
solves a new problem with that information. This currently 
happens a lot with image recognition. Pre-trained neural 
networks are used to solve new problems.



© Copyright IBM Corporation 2018

IBM Corporation 
New Orchard Road 
Armonk, NY 10504 

Produced in the United States of America 
October 2018

IBM, the IBM logo, ibm.com, and IBM Watson are trademarks or 
registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp., 
registered in many jurisdictions worldwide. Other product and  
service names might be trademarks of IBM or other companies.  
A current list of IBM trademarks is available on the web at  
www.ibm.com/legal/copytrade.shtml. 

Microsoft, Windows, Windows NT and the Windows logo are 
trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other 
countries, or both.

This document is current as of the initial date of publication and may 
be changed by IBM at any time. Not all offerings are available in every 
country in which IBM operates. 

The performance data and client examples cited are presented for 
illustrative purposes only. Actual performance results may vary depending 
on specific configurations and operating conditions. THE INFORMATION 
IN THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED “AS IS” WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY, 
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES OF 
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND ANY 
WARRANTY OR CONDITION OF NON-INFRINGEMENT. IBM products are 
warranted according to the terms and conditions of the agreements under 
which they are provided.

 1 www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-
what-it-means-and-how-to-respond 

 2 www.quora.com/What-is-artificial-intelligence-What-are-task-
domains-in-AI 

 3 ai100.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ai_100_report_0906fnlc_
single.pdf 

 4 www.investopedia.com/terms/a/artificial-intelligence-ai.asp  

 5 neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap5.html

 6 datasciencedegree.wisconsin.edu/data-science/what-do-data-
scientists-do

 7 www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-social-design-of-
technical-systems-building-technologies-for-communities/the-
evolution-of-computing 

 8 www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2017/06/13/ethics-and-artificial-
intelligence-with-ibm-watsons-rob-high/#72b4a0e3260e 
www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2016/12/21/artificial-intelligence-
pioneers-peter-norvig-google/#6ecd8a2d38c6 

 9 www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/
ssialias?htmlfid=KUM12390USEN&, page 67

 10 homes.cs.washington.edu/~marcotcr/blog/lime

39019539-USEN-00

Please Recycle

http://www.ibm.com/legal/copytrade.shtml
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond 
https://www.quora.com/What-is-artificial-intelligence-What-are-task-domains-in-AI 
https://www.quora.com/What-is-artificial-intelligence-What-are-task-domains-in-AI 
https://ai100.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ai_100_report_0906fnlc_single.pdf 
https://ai100.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ai_100_report_0906fnlc_single.pdf 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/artificial-intelligence-ai.asp  
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap5.html
https://datasciencedegree.wisconsin.edu/data-science/what-do-data-scientists-do
https://datasciencedegree.wisconsin.edu/data-science/what-do-data-scientists-do
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-social-design-of-technical-systems-building-technolog
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-social-design-of-technical-systems-building-technolog
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-social-design-of-technical-systems-building-technolog
http://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2017/06/13/ethics-and-artificial-intelligence-with-ibm-watsons-rob-
http://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2017/06/13/ethics-and-artificial-intelligence-with-ibm-watsons-rob-
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2016/12/21/artificial-intelligence-pioneers-peter-norvig-google/#6ecd8
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2016/12/21/artificial-intelligence-pioneers-peter-norvig-google/#6ecd8
https://www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?htmlfid=KUM12390USEN&,
https://www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?htmlfid=KUM12390USEN&,
https://homes.cs.washington.edu/~marcotcr/blog/lime



