





















































Preparing for Advanced Analytics


PreParing Your organization for 

What You Need to Know to Succeed from the Start



taBLe of ContentS
Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3

The Data Landscape  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4

Making a Plan for your Organization   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .8

Intel Offers Proven Solutions for Advanced Data Analytics  .  .  .  .  . 10

Conclusion   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12



3  Introduction

introDuCtion
IT decision makers are on the front lines of gathering, sorting, and analyzing 
big data in order to equip their organizations to make the best business 
decisions today, and tomorrow . While IT departments have access to more 
data and more tools than ever, the sheer amount of information being 
generated, and the growing number of applications and platforms available 
to harness and understand that information, make managing advanced 
data analytics a challenge for many IT professionals .

Big data analytics can deliver efficiency and speed, with the ability to 
identify insights for instant and informed decision-making . This enables an 
organization to work more quickly and productively, stay agile, and even 
gain a competitive advantage . 

But there are challenges that come with big data as well, from segmenting 
useful data from clusters and identifying the right data stores and platforms 
to eliminating problematic data silos and finding and integrating the best 
big data tools into your architecture . 

Advanced analytics enables organizations to: 
• Work more quickly
• Stay agile
• Gain competitive advantage



4  The Data Landscape

the Data LanDSCaPe
As the volume of data grows exponentially, from the heart of enterprise 
data centers to the cloud and the outer edges of the network, IT departments 
must learn to extract value from data more quickly and accurately than 
ever before . 

A highly optimized and scalable platform for analytics is necessary to support 
the complex compute requirements of increasingly heavy and diverse 
data workloads—from traditional business intelligence (BI) and structured 
databases to more advanced artificial intelligence (AI), predictive analytics 
and machine learning . 
 
Efficiently tiered storage strategies enable rapid analysis of different data 
types, both structured and unstructured, across disparate systems . This 
is necessary for businesses to extract timely value for actionable insight 
as well as faster networks . In fact, every domain of infrastructure must be 
transformed to handle the extreme demands that advanced data workloads 
will place on compute, memory, storage, interconnect, and I/O subsystems 
in data centers .

It is only through identifying deeper, more beneficial insights—in real time—
that IT decision makers can help their staff, and their organizations, to move 
beyond traditional data analytics and embark upon more critical and high-
value initiatives, including machine learning and AI .

This requires leveraging intelligence from widely distributed sources in order 
to store that data efficiently, analyze the data rapidly, and identify insights 
that can be used to make better business decisions at every opportunity .

In order to utilize data as a competitive advantage, 
organizations need to modernize their data acquisition 
and analytics across every critical domain, including:

 Compute

 Storage

 Network 

 Security



5  The Data Landscape

 The Five Categories of Analytics
While analytics continue to evolve rapidly, it’s important to know the types 
of analytics that organizations are working to capture and leverage today. 

It is widely accepted that there are five separate categories 
of analytics:
• Descriptive analytics: Summarizes historical data; answers questions 

about what happened in the past

• Diagnostic analytics: Examines data to gain insight into why things 
happened

• Predictive analytics: Analyzes both new and historical data to forecast 
activity, behavior, and trends

• Prescriptive analytics: Uses data techniques such as simulation or 
machine learning to identify the best course of action for a given situation

• Cognitive analytics: Leverages AI technologies and high-performance 
data analytics to automate decisions or augment human decisions

While most companies typically use the traditional analytic techniques of 
descriptive and diagnostic analytics, they have not yet moved up to the 
advanced analytics of predictive, prescriptive, and cognitive analytics. 

By moving up to this higher level of data analytics that leverages machine 
learning and AI, companies can utilize the power and sophistication of 
advanced analytics to provide natural interaction-based collaboration, 
where human experience is augmented with smart machines to offer 
breakthrough insights for businesses.



6  The Data Landscape

The Four-Layered Analytics Solutions Stack
An analytics solution stack is a bundled set of programs and application 
software put together to produce a desired result. The technologies 
and applications of each component work together, often in a sequential 
manner, to create functional programs that deliver advanced analytics 
solutions.

The analytics solution stack is made up of four layers:

Infrastructure layer:
The foundation for acquiring, storing, and protecting data, as well  
as for running commercial and open source analytics solutions

Data layer:
Relational databases are often supplemented by Hadoop Distributed 
File System (HDFS), which can form the basis of enterprise data hubs 
or data lakes

Analytics layer:
Building blocks for the analytic end-user application, and may 
include open source offerings such as Apache Spark™ and Apache 
Storm™, or suites from enterprise leaders such as Microsoft, SAP, 
SAS, Oracle, or IBM

Applications layer:
Out-of-the-box analytics applications that provide analytics to the 
various user types of data

The four layers of a solution stack should complement each other as 
a flexible big data platform that can take advantage of existing data 
management systems to deliver traditional and advanced analytics. 
Other technologies, such as AI and performance and security solutions, 
run through all the layers of the solution stack, accelerating advanced 
analytics insights, and protecting your data.



7  The Data Landscape

What is Big Data? What is AI? How Do They 
Work Together?
The internet of things (IoT) is creating a world of connectedness we 
could never have imagined even a decade ago. Big data describes the 
incredibly large volumes of information being processed, and how this 
information in an almost endless source of insights about the digital 
world and how people interact with technology. This data is ideally 
suited for analysis, and can be used to understand trends and make 
critical predictions.

Yet as more people connect to more devices in more ways, there is no 
practical way for humans to efficiently analyze and monitor the data at a 
pace that is quick enough to be useful. Which is why there is increasing 
demand for artificial intelligence (AI). One of the truly revolutionary 
developments in computing, AI has become a fundamental tool for a 
wide range of technologies, including robotics, medicine, communication, 
and the previously mentioned IoT. 

With IT departments being expected to manage all of the extremely 
complex issues associated with big data, they needed a better technology 
solution to address these issues. The answer: AI. Sorting and analyzing 
all the intricacies of big data may be too much for even large teams 
of IT pros, but AI can cut through the clutter to automatically analyze 
millions of data sets quickly and efficiently. AI provides the insights 
hidden in big data, so organizations can use those insights to improve 
everything from provisioning servers to improving customer service. 



8  Making a Plan for your Organization

Utilize analytic techniques to gain insights:
• How does data flow into your organization?
• How is data shared across departments?

Making a PLan for 
Your organization
Planning is critical in the use of data analytics to spur innovation, create 
better customer experiences, and drive business . You must be prepared to 
maximize your analytics capabilities by developing a modern data center 
infrastructure to keep up with the growing velocity and volume of data . 

Begin by gaining a comprehensive understanding of how data flows into 
your organization and how it is shared and utilized across departments . 
This will enable your organization to utilize increasingly sophisticated 
analytic techniques to gain rapid, actionable insights .

You also need a comprehensive analytics strategy to address the distributed 
nature of data from the cloud to the edge and examine key infrastructure 
capabilities needed to support a broad range of analytics—from traditional 
to real-time big data analytics to machine learning—with higher levels of 
data protection . 

The ability to efficiently capture, store, transport, and analyze these data 
streams is a critical competitive differentiator—setting apart organizations 
that are overwhelmed by data from those that know how to use data as a 
powerful business tool .



9  Making a Plan for your Organization

Three Priorities of an Effective Data 
Analytics Plan
More than ever, companies need timely, in-depth insights to compete 
on a global level. But those insights can only come from better ways 
of accessing, organizing, and interpreting information—in effect, taking 
a “holistic” approach to analytics. 

Here are three imperatives of a successful plan:

Tame the data deluge: Enterprises must get their data layer 
right from the start. Successful enterprise analytics requires 
eliminating data “silos,” and providing highly structured and 
enforced data governance, integrity, and quality.

Accelerate insights: Faster time to value was the number 
one requirement that executives wanted from their analytics 
infrastructure, according to a 2016 Forrester survey.2 By 
accelerating the insights from that data, companies are better 
prepared to drive business growth and innovation.  
   
Enable enterprise AI: Increasingly, disciplines such as advanced 
analytics and AI are merging.  Forward-thinking organizations 
are already taking steps to achieve this integration. The value 
created will leave less-prepared competitors in their wake. 

1

2

3



10  Intel Offers Proven Solutions for Advanced Data Analytics 

inteL offerS 
Proven SoLutionS 
for aDvanCeD Data 
anaLYtiCS 
As your organization begins developing and executing its own advanced 
analytics initiatives, Intel can be your guide to ensuring that your infrastructure  
and solutions deliver the performance and scalability needed to succeed 
on this project . Intel can also help you continually optimize for the future . 

Intel, along with a select group of partners, can provide your company with 
the proven technologies needed to create a comprehensive advanced 
analytics solution stack, including:

 CoMPute: Intel’s rich portfolio of workload-optimized processors covers 
the full range of analytics needs . Intel® Xeon® Scalable processors 

deliver highly scalable performance for a wide variety of analytics, AI, 
and other data center workloads. This proven, integrated platform offers 
low TCO for batch deep learning inference and classic machine learning 
workloads . Intel® FPGAs (Field Programmable Gate Arrays) complement 
Intel® Xeon® processors for real- time programmable acceleration of intensive 
data analytics and deep learning inference AI workloads . Count on Intel® 
FPGAs when power efficiency, low-latency, and programmable flexibility 
are critical considerations .

 Storage: Breakthroughs in storage media, such as solid state drives 
and Intel® Optane™ technology, are redefining the cost, capacity, and 

latency of storage . Intel® 3D NAND SSDs deliver the response times, capacity, 
and resilience you need to have significant impact on accessing data more 
quickly for much faster analysis . With a robust data tiering strategy established, 
you can choose the data architecture (in-memory scale-up system like 
SAP HANA or scale out database like Apache Hadoop) that best supports 
the requirements of your analytics initiatives .

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/processors/xeon/scalable/xeon-scalable-platform.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/fpga/solutions.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/solid-state-drives/3d-nand-technology-animation.html


11  Intel Offers Proven Solutions for Advanced Data Analytics 

 networking: To help your organization avoid delays in moving your 
data from your data lake or warehouse to your compute infrastructure, 

Intel provides the Intel® Omni-Path Architecture, the next-generation fabric 
for AI, analytics, and high-performance computing (HPC) . Integrated Intel® 
Ethernet with scalable iWARP RDMA provides up to 4 x 10GbE high-speed 
Ethernet capability for high data throughput and low latency workloads . 
It’s ideal for software-defined storage solutions, NVM Express over Fabric 
solutions and virtual machine migrations .

 Software LiBrarieS anD aCCeLeratorS: Computational speed is a key 
ingredient for success and Intel helps you get there . How? With 

innovative software libraries and accelerators that optimize frameworks 
for higher performance on Intel® architecture, from the Intel® Data Analytics 
Acceleration Library (Intel® DAAL), designed to help software developers 
reduce the time it takes to develop their applications to the Intel® Math 
Kernel Library (Intel® MKL), which accelerates math processing routines 
that increase application performance and reduce development time . Intel 
also supports BigDL, a distributed deep learning library for Apache Spark . 
Using BigDL, you can write deep learning applications as Scala or Python 
programs and take advantage of the power of scalable Spark clusters . 

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/high-performance-computing-fabrics/omni-path-driving-exascale-computing.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ethernet-products/iwarp-rdma-here-and-now-technology-brief.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ethernet-products/iwarp-rdma-here-and-now-technology-brief.html
https://software.intel.com/en-us/blogs/daal
https://software.intel.com/en-us/blogs/daal
https://software.intel.com/en-us/mkl
https://software.intel.com/en-us/mkl
https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/bigdl-distributed-deep-learning-on-apache-spark


ConCLuSion
Intel is a proven and trusted partner for organizations that want to enable 
and accelerate the promise of advanced analytics and AI . Intel has been 
delivering breakthrough advancements and optimizing analytics/AI workloads  
for decades . 

In order to speed up the “time to insight” within your organization, you need  
to take a holistic approach across the hardware, software, and solutions 
framework . At the hardware and infrastructure level, the choice of processors, 
memory capacity, storage media, network technologies, and cluster architecture 
can all determine improvements in speed and efficiency.

Intel® Xeon® Scalable processors provide an ideal foundation for taking 
your advanced data analytics to the next level, and beyond . Intel® Xeon® 
processors offer an agile platform for artificial intelligence and analytics 
workloads, able to handle scale-up workloads with the largest in-memory 
requirements, and process massive data sets distributed across myriad 
clustered systems .   

Intel® Select Solutions offer end users confidence in a performance choice  
built on decades of experience and collaboration among Intel, our industry 
ecosystem of partners, and data center leaders. From simplified evaluation 
to fast, easy deployment, Intel® Select Solutions provide the benefits 
organizations seek from advanced data analytics . 

When used in collaboration with Intel® Xeon® Scalable processors, Intel®  
Select Solutions make workload optimization a competitive tool for growing 
your business . 

Ready for the next step?

eXPLore the eguiDe

Learn More at inteL.CoM/anaLYtiCS

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/cloud-computing/advanced-analytics-next-level-guide.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/analytics/overview.html


For additional information, explore the following assets:

• White paper  |  How to Tame the Data Deluge
• White paper  |  Five steps to the data-driven business
• White paper  |  Data In, Value Out
• Planning guide  |  Getting Started with Advanced Analytics

Sources

1 Business Technographics Global Data And Analytics Survey, Tyler McDaniel, Forrester Research, 2016

Intel technologies’ features and benefits depend on system configuration and may require enabled hardware, software or service 
activation . Performance varies depending on system configuration . No computer system can be absolutely secure . Check with 
your system manufacturer or retailer or learn more at intel .com .

Intel does not control or audit third-party benchmark data or the web sites referenced in this document . You should visit the 
referenced web site and confirm whether referenced data are accurate .

Intel, the Intel logo and Xeon are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries in the U .S . and/or other countries . 

* Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others .

© Intel Corporation .

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/analytics/tame-the-data-deluge-paper.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/analytics/five-steps-data-driven-business-whitepaper.html
https://www-ssl.intel.com/content/www/us/en/analytics/business-value-through-advanced-analytics-whitepaper.html
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/analytics/getting-started-advanced-analytics-planning-guide.html



