Demystifying data science White paper | OpenText


WHITE PAPERWHITE PAPER

Demystifying data science
How organizations can benefit from artificial intelligence and 
advanced analytics



2/14Demystifying data science 

Contents
What is artificial intelligence and machine learning? 4 

How can an organization derive business value from AI and analytics?  6

What are the requirements for adopting AI? 7

How can data science, artificial intelligence 
and analytics transform business processes? 9

Common techniques and methodologies 10

Machine learning 10

Supervised learning 11

Unsupervised learning 12

Natural language processing 13

Key questions to ask and how to define high value use-cases 13

Resources 14



3/14Demystifying data science 

Summary
By 2020, Forbes estimates that 85 percent of customer interactions will be 
managed without a human.1 While many of us use AI technology, such as Alexa and 
Siri, as part of our daily lives, we may not be aware of its greater uses. In fact, with 
machine learning applied, AI can help teach computers, target ads and personalize 
content for consumers to ensure better and more informed business decisions.

This paper will clarify some key definitions around artificial intelligence and 
machine learning. It will also simplify some common techniques in machine learning, 
such as supervised learning, natural language processing and classification, and 
identify the types of business questions these techniques can answer.

While understanding a small number of customers may not pose a challenge, 
keeping pace as organizations grow and expand their customer base can be 
difficult. Data analytics can help reveal trends and metrics that would otherwise 
be lost among the masses of information. Organizations are now starting to 
leverage descriptive, diagnostic, predictive and prescriptive analytics to address 
the growing needs and demands of their customer base.

The promise of artificial intelligence is exciting but before jumping in organizations 
need the right data literacy, infrastructure and expertise. This paper will also cover 
key competencies organizations need to get started with AI and how to progress 
from data collection, exploration and analytics to artificial intelligence.

Finally, this paper will help define meaningful and high value use-cases with 
a structured framework to gather and align business, technology and data 
requirements for a successful artificial intelligence implementation.



4/14Demystifying data science 

What is artificial intelligence and machine learning?
According to Gartner, artificial intelligence will generate $2.9 trillion USD in 
business value and recover 6.2 billion hours of worker productivity by 2021.2 
To realize the high growth potential and costs savings from analytics and AI 
technology, we must demystify some key artificial intelligence, machine learning 
and analytics concepts. 

Simply put, artificial intelligence systems automate and simplify tasks, such as 
recognizing objects, making sense of speech, etc. But, how does that lead to 
learning how to drive a car? A key concept of AI technology is the difference 
between learning and training. Just as a human goes through the process of 
driver training to become proficient, a computer learns from experience or, 
more specifically, data. Once the system has data on good driving practices and 
the “rules of the road”, it becomes intelligent enough to make decisions in the 
real world. While there are more complexities in the learning, management and 
monitoring of such technology and solutions, this is the core of AI. 

Deep learning

Popular and powerful set of machine learning techniques, which mimic the brain’s 
neuron activities, called  neural networks.

Machine learning

Field of AI that learns from historical data towards an end goal/outcome. For 
example, the customers likely to default on their home loan.

Artificial intelligence

Computing systems capable of performing tasks that humans are very good at, 
such as recognizing objects, recognizing and making sense of speech, self-driving 
cars.

Source: https://www.kdnuggets.com/2018/11/an-introduction-ai.html

Machine learning, a subset of artificial intelligence, enables users to learn from 
historical data to achieve a desired outcome. It powers targeted ads, personalized 
content, song recommendations, predictive maintenance activities, virtual 
assistants and more. 

Machine learning can be broken down into two key phases, learning and predicting. 
In the learning phase, certain statistical techniques or algorithms are applied to 
historical data and/or previous business outcomes to generate a machine learning 
model. A model can be thought of as a set of rules or instructions, such as steps in 
a recipe, that one must follow to make a business decision. 

For example, in order to approve a loan application, a loan officer will consider 
income, age, net worth and many other factors before making a final decision. 
Each attribute of the application is a rule or factor that the officer must evaluate 
to approve or reject the loan. Machine learning techniques follow a similar 
methodology, comparing various attributes, historical decisions and the outcome 
of similar applicants to estimate the credit worthiness of the new applicant. 

Just as a human goes 
through the process of 
driver training to become 
proficient, a computer 
learns from experience or, 
more specifically, data. 

Machine learning, a subset 
of artificial intelligence, 
enables users to learn 
from historical data to 
achieve a desired outcome. 
It powers targeted ads, 
personalized content, 
song recommendations, 
predictive maintenance 
activities, virtual assistants 
and more. 

Deep learning Machine learning Artificial intelligence

Popular and powerful 
set of machine learning 

techniques, which mimic 
the brain’s neuron 

activities, called 
neural networks.

Field of AI that learns from 
historical data towards an 

end goal/outcome. For 
example, the customers 
likely to default on their 

home loan.

Computing systems 
capable of performing 

tasks that humans are very 
good at, such as 

recognizing objects, 
recognizing and making 

sense of speech, 
self-driving cars.



5/14Demystifying data science 

In the predicting phase, patterns identified during the learning phase are applied 
to new data or business processes to score or predict the likelihood of outcomes. 
Scoring outcomes enables organizations to optimize resource allocation and 
decision-making activities, make more intelligent decisions and automate key 
business processes at scale. Some key business questions that machine learning 
techniques can help answer include:

1. Will my customer purchase product X?

2. Will my customer like a recommended song?

3. Which of my customers are likely to switch to a competitor or cancel their contract?

4. Of all recently submitted claims, which ones are likely to require an additional 
fraud investigation unit review?

5. Is this applicant likely to default on their car loan in the future?

What do algorithms do?

Task Main objective Insight/ result

An algorithm is a step-
by-step instruction set 
or formula for solving a 
problem or completing a 
task

Minimize errors or 
some sort of “loss 
function” to attain the 
best approach to solve 
a task

The algorithm learns from 
its mistakes/errors, finds 
the best approach and 
generates insights and 
rules that can be used to 
make predictions

1.	Take	the	chicken	out

2.	 Salt	and	season

3.	 Bake	it

Minimize	the	number	
of	things/steps	needed	
to	take	in	order	to	
serve	the	dish

Learn	from	your	mistakes	
	the	next	time	you	attempt	
	the	recipe

With the growth of data, the invention of advanced algorithms and cheaper 
commodity hardware to process big data at scale, deep learning, a powerful set 
of machine learning techniques, has become prominent in the industry. Deep 
learning techniques mimic the brain’s neuron activities, which is why they are also 
referred to as neural networks. Some common applications include natural language 
processing, image recognition, realistic photo and video generation. 

With the growth of data, 
the invention of advanced 
algorithms and cheaper 
commodity hardware to 
process big data at scale, 
deep learning, a powerful 
set of machine learning 
techniques, has become 
prominent in the industry. 

Task
An algorithm is a 

step-by-step instruction set 
or formula for solving a 

problem or completing a task

1. Take the chicken out
2. Salt and season
3. Bake it

Minimize errors or some sort 
of “loss function” to attain the 
best approach to solve a task

Minimize the number of 
things/steps needed to take 

in order to serve the dish

The algorithm learns from its 
mistakes/errors, finds the 

best approach and generates 
insights and rules that can be 

used to make predictions

Learn from your mistakes 
the next time you attempt 

the recipe

Main
objective

Insight/
result

Machine learning Recipe Analogy



6/14Demystifying data science 

How can an organization derive business value from AI  
and analytics? 
There are some common questions organizations consider when appealing 
to their customer base: Who are the customers? What do they want? How can 
the organization provide the best customer experience to gain a competitive 
advantage? Data analytics help answer these business questions. 

Data analytics is the science of analyzing raw data to draw conclusions from that 
information. Data analytics techniques can reveal trends and metrics that would 
otherwise be lost in a mass of information. This information can then be utilized 
to optimize processes to increase the overall efficiency of a business or system. 
Data analytics techniques can be broken down into four main types based on the 
difficulty of analysis and business value.

a.  Descriptive analytics parses raw historical data and draws conclusion that help 
managers, investors and others determine why business changes occurred.  

b.  Diagnostic analytics provides an understanding of why events took place 
by examining data. A type of advanced analytics, techniques include data 
discovery and mining, correlation analysis and drill-down. 

c.  Predictive analytics uses statistics and modeling to predict future behavior. Using 
data patterns, predictive analytics identifies when patterns are likely to reoccur 
to identify and prevent potential risks, take advantage of future opportunities or 
advantageously reallocate resources. 

d.  Prescriptive analytics uses machine learning to analyze raw data to help 
organizations make better decision and take a proper course of action. Factoring 
in possible scenarios, available resources, past performance and current 
performance, prescriptive analytics help determine the best course of action in 
a situation.

Data analytics techniques can be broken down 
into four main types based on the difficulty of 
analysis and business value:

a.  Descriptive analytics. What happened?

b.  Diagnostic analytics. Why did it happen?

c.  Predictive analytics. What will happen?

d.  Prescriptive analytics. How can we make it 
happen?

Business
value

Difficulty

Predictive analytics
What will happen? 

Prescriptive 
analytics

How can we 
make it happen? Diagnostic analytics 

Why did it happen?

Descriptive analytics 
What happened?



7/14Demystifying data science 

What are the requirements for adopting AI?
This hierarchical pyramid explains the competencies every organization requires  
to ensure a successful AI implementation. 

AI,  deep learning

Machine learning  and benchmarking:  A/B testing,  experimentation

BI or analytics:  Metrics, segmentation,  aggregation, data labelling

Explore and transform:  Data preparation, cleaning  and exploratory data analysis

Data flow:  Infrastructure, pipelines, ETL,  structured and unstructured data storage

Data collection:  External data, logging, sensors,  user generated content

AI, 
deep 

learning

Machine learning 
and benchmarking: 

A/B testing, 
experimentation

BI or analytics: 
Metrics, segmentation, 

aggregation, data labelling

Explore and transform: 
Data preparation, cleaning 

and exploratory data analysis

Data flow: 
Infrastructure, pipelines, ETL, 

structured and unstructured data storage

Data collection: 
External data, logging, sensors, 

user generated content

Data collection. At the bottom of the pyramid is data collection. At this stage, the 
goal is to identify what data is needed and what is available. If it is a user-facing 
product, are all relevant interactions logged? If it is a sensor, what data is coming 
through and how? Without data, no machine learning or AI solution can learn or 
predict outcomes.

Data flow. Identify how the data flows through the system. Is there a reliable 
stream/ETL process established? Where is the data stored, and how easy is it to 
access and analyze?

Explore and transform. Only when data is accessible can it be explored and 
transformed for modelling. This stage is one of the most time-consuming and 
underestimated of the data science project lifecycle. It is at this stage that teams 
and organizations realize that they are missing data, their machine sensors are 
unreliable, they are not tracking relevant information about customers and other 
key issues. It forces them to return to data collection and ensure the foundation is 
solid before moving forward.

“Not going to the top is like 
an insight engine working 
at half capacity, not using 
all its potential.”



8/14Demystifying data science 

Business intelligence and analytics. When teams can reliably explore and clean 
data, organizations can start building what is traditionally thought of as business 
intelligence or analytics, which includes defining key metrics to track, identifying 
how seasonality impacts product sales and operations, segmenting users based on 
demographic factors, etc. However, as the goal is to build an artificial intelligence 
solution, it is important to start thinking about the features or attributes to include 
in machine learning models, what training data the machine will need to learn, what 
to predict and automate and how to create the labels from which the machine will 
learn. Label creation can be done automatically, such as when the machine breaks 
down and it automatically registers an event in the back-end system. Or, it can 
be done by introducing humans. For example, an engineer reports an issue when 
a machine part seems to be faulty during a routine inspection and the result is 
manually added to the data. 

Machine learning and benchmarking. Although there is sample data that can be 
used to make predictions, work is not complete. A/B testing or experimentation 
framework needs to be in place to deploy models incrementally and avoid real 
world disasters. Model validation and experimentation approaches provide a 
rough estimate of the effects of changes before practical implementation. At 
this stage, a very simple baseline or benchmark for performance tracking should 
be established. An example fraud detection system includes monitoring high 
risk credit card transactions that were proved to be fraudulent and comparing 
them with the current operational performance of machine learning models to 
accurately detect fraud. 

Artificial intelligence. At this stage a team might be looking to make 
improvements in production. This can be achieved by learning new methods 
and techniques in machine learning and deep learning to improve processes, 
predictions, outcomes and insights. By leveraging advanced and new techniques, 
teams can gain an Information Advantage from massive amounts of data, explore 
and model it faster and build solutions, such as voice assistants.



9/14Demystifying data science 

How can data science, artificial intelligence and analytics 
help transform business processes?
Data science is a multi-disciplinary field that uses scientific methods, processes, 
algorithms and systems to extract knowledge and insights from structured and 
unstructured data. Because there are a number of different techniques and 
methodologies, it is often difficult to narrow down the scope of how data science 
can impact business performance, operations, customer experience and costs. Here 
are just a few ways data science can be leveraged.

Augment employee decisions with data-driven insights and intelligence 

Utilize subject matter experts’ knowledge of how employees make business 
decisions and transform the steps into data point, applying machine learning 
techniques to identify the decision making pattern from this historical data to 
predict future business outcomes. Organizations can design an intelligent system 
that can handle complex requests or tasks, provide intelligent/best fit decisions 
for individual scenarios and empower employees to make decisions quickly and 
more effectively. Some example uses include credit risk scoring, automated 
underwriting, wealth management fund assistants and customer service chatbots. 

Automate and improve the efficiency of operations with intelligent,  
data-driven decisions

Leverage AI and analytics techniques to drive operational efficiency. By utilizing 
sensor information from machines, machine learning can help predict when a 
specific machine is likely to require maintenance, allowing technicians to be 
proactive rather than reactive in maintenance efforts. Some AI applications in this 
context include predictive maintenance, recommender systems, robotic process 
automation and airline scheduling. 

Apply data driven insights to make timely and consequential tactical  
and strategic decisions

Better inform management and strategic decisions by leveraging machine learning 
and advanced analytics. These tend to be ad hoc projects or solutions, where 
the goal is to apply statistical techniques to gain key insights around business 
processes. For example, by measuring analytics related to cleanliness, customer 
service, overall satisfaction, etc., an amusement park operations manager can 
determine the likelihood of repeat customers, identify key gaps in operations and 
better market the value of the park to the right demographics.

Personalize customer experiences

Identify and recommend personalized products at scale with recommender 
systems. The likes of Google, Amazon, Facebook and Apple have made 
personalization an expectation. Recommender systems are one of the more 
popular examples of how machine learning can be leveraged to analyze data 
across millions of users to accomplish this. By analyzing and tracking various 
customer touchpoints, some retailers are now able to predict the likelihood 
of users buying future products. It is important to note that machine learning 
solutions need not be 100 percent accurate to realize business value and ROI. 
The goal should be to conduct data-driven decision making at scale to reduce 
operational costs and optimize resources and targeting efforts.



10/14Demystifying data science 

Utilize data driven insights and intelligence to accelerate new product 
development

Convert massive amounts of big data into meaningful and actionable insights. Voice 
assistants, autopilot features and smart home devices have become part of day-
to-day life. This new class of AI-driven products are powered by machine learning 
and advanced analytics techniques, allowing organizations and teams to better 
understand consumer needs and wants, feature requests and usage patterns.

Common techniques and methodologies in machine learning
Machine learning takes what comes naturally to humans and applies it at scale.  
For example, when machine learning reviews a loan application, it can review 
5,000 credit transactions, three credit reports, 10 incidents, the five-year income 
history of Joe Adams in seconds. This would not be possible by a domain expert. 
They simply do not have the capacity to reviews with the speed of a machine and 
provide a decision on his loan as soon as it is submitted. Even if the expert is highly 
experienced and efficient, it takes considerable time to review application details 
and there is still room for human error. Machine learning uses past experience and 
trends in historical data related to customers in both good standing and those that 
defaulted on loans to make a decision. With the combination of machine learning 
and good quality data, organizations can quickly make unbiased, data-driven 
decisions at scale in seconds.

Machine learning offers various approaches to solve business problems. The first 
approach is based on whether there is data related to the outcome of a process. 
Did the machine stop working? Did the customer leave? Did the employee quit? 
It is important to understand and model how behavior and fluctuations in data 
lead to a certain business outcome. This type of machine learning is known as 
supervised learning. 

Machine learning

Unsupervised learning Supervised learning

•	Data	does	not	contain	
a	category/response	to	
predict

•	The	goal	here	is	to	learn	
about	the	underlying	
structure	or	distribution	
of	the	data,	and	discover	
inherent	patterns	from	
within	it	in	order	to	draw	
inferences

•		We	know	the	outcome/
response

•	Takes	known	set	of	input	
data	and	responses	to	it,	and						
trains	a	model	to	generate	
reasonable	predictions	for						
the	response	to	new	dataMachine

learning

Unsupervised learning

•  Data does not contain a category/response to predict

•  The goal here is to learn about the underlying structure   
    or distribution of the data, and discover inherent 
    patterns from within it in order to draw inferences

Supervised learning

•  We know the outcome/response

•  Takes known set of input data and responses to it, and 
    trains a model to generate reasonable predictions for 
    the response to new data



11/14Demystifying data science 

If there is no response or category to predict, the goal is to learn the underlying 
structure of the data and discover patterns to draw real world inferences. For 
example, unsupervised learning approaches are commonly used to segment 
customers based on demographic, behavior and past product purchase history. 
This allows an organization to learn more about their customers, which products 
are frequently bought together and how different groups prefer certain services 
and products over others. It may not immediately understand that Emily from 
Philadelphia falls within customer segment X, but the organization can learn how 
many of its customers are similar to Emily based on behavior and consumption 
characteristics. Are they active on mobile? Do they use social media? Do they 
visit retail stores for purchases? Are they affluent? These insights can allow 
organizations to make data-driven decisions for future marketing campaigns, 
product development, etc. 

Supervised learning

Supervised learning can be broken down into two categories based on what it is 
trying to predict.

Supervised learning

Classification  (categories) Regression (numbers)

Use	if	data	can	be	tagged,	
categorized	or	separated	
into	specific	groups		or	
classes

Use	if	the	response	being	
predicted	is	a	real	number

Supervised learning

Classification 
(categories)

Regression
(numbers)

Use if data can be tagged, 
categorized or separated 

into specific groups 
or classes

Use if the response being 
predicted is a real number

Classification algorithms or approaches are used when asking questions regarding 
categories. Examples include: 

• Will this customer switch to another competitor in the next month?

• Will this customer default in the next month, six months or year?

• Is an email spam or genuine?

• Is this document for compliance, legal or customer support?

Regression algorithms or approaches are used when asking questions with  
numerical outcomes:

• What will the temperature be at 6:00 pm today?

• In how many days will this machine stop working? 

• What should be the price of a property based on size, number of rooms and location?

• How many orders am I likely to receive in the next three months for my product?



12/14Demystifying data science 

Unsupervised learning

There are multiple unsupervised learning approaches and techniques that can 
be utilized to gain meaningful insights. One of the more popular techniques is 
clustering, which groups things that are similar or have features in common. 
Organizations use clustering techniques to answer business questions, such as:

• How many distinct customer groups exist for my products? Who belongs to  
which group? 

• To which customer subgroups should I market my product and how should I target 
them? What are the key characteristics of each group?

• How can I group my documents into distinct categories?

If a business is looking to answer questions around the identification of anomalies 
or rare behavior and occurrences, anomaly detection techniques are utilized to 
identify unusual patterns that do not conform to expected behavior, called outliers. 
It has many applications in business, from intrusion detection, such as identifying 
strange patterns in network traffic, to system health monitoring, including spotting 
a malignant tumor in an MRI scan. Some additional questions that can be answered 
using these techniques include:

•  Given a massive database of financial data, which transactions are suspicious 
and likely to be fraudulent? 

• Given the huge number of container shipments arriving at a country’s ports every 
day, which should be opened by customs to prevent smuggling, terrorism, etc.?

•  Given a log of all the traffic on a computer network, which sessions represent 
attempted intrusions?

Association mining, another set of techniques, can help find correlations 
between different products or factors in an organization’s data. For example, if a 
customer purchases baby diapers, he or she has a 60 percent chance of purchasing 
baby lotion within the next month. By identifying such insights using association 
mining, retailers can predict the need for new products and target customers with 
coupons and offers before the customer even realizes they are running out of baby 
lotion. The most common application of association mining algorithms is in market 
basket analysis.

Unsupervised learning

Clustering Anomaly detection Association mining

Partition	the	data	
set	into	X	groups	
so	that	records		in	
the	same	group	
are	similar	to	each	
other,	and		records	
in	different	groups	
are	dissimilar

Identification	
of	rare	items,	
events	or	
observations	which	
raise	suspicion	
by	differing	
significantly	from	
	the	majority	of	the	
data

Find	frequent	
patterns,	
correlations	and	
	associations	
among	a	set	of	
items	in	relational	
	and	transaction	
databases

U
ns

up
er

vi
se

d 
le

ar
ni

ng

Clustering

Anomaly detection

Association mining

Partition the data set into X groups so that records 
in the same group are similar to each other, and 
records in different groups are dissimilar

Identification of rare items, events or observations
which raise suspicion by differing significantly from 
the majority of the data

Find frequent patterns, correlations and 
associations among a set of items in relational 
and transaction databases



13/14Demystifying data science 

Natural language processing (NLP)

Natural language processing is a set of systematic processes for intelligently 
and efficiently analyzing, understanding and deriving information from text data. 
It can organize massive amounts of text data and perform numerous automated 
tasks, such as automatic summarization, machine translation, named entity 
recognition, relationship extraction, sentiment analysis, speech recognition and 
topic segmentation.

Key questions to ask and how to define high value use-cases
To identify meaningful and high value use-cases for teams and organizations, it is 
important to gather relevant information and requirements on three key pillars. 

1. Business knowledge
• What is the current business process? How are things done currently? Does 
someone manually identify which products to recommend to each customer? 
Does someone manually review each loan application for fraud or risk? Does an 
engineer manually inspect all machinery each week for failure? Be as specific and 
detailed as possible in defining the current process. 

• Define measurable goals and objectives. Is it to replace or enhance an existing 
process? Is it to increase revenue and conversions from product upsell and cross sell 
opportunities or to increase software subscriptions by three percent this quarter?

• What areas can be improved? What is the business question to be answered 
with analytics? Leverage subject matter experts to identify key pain points and 
gaps in the current business process. Determine what part of the process can 
be enhanced. Where can data-driven insights be used? Is the objective to speed 
up loan application processing? Identify high risk transactions on credit cards? 
Understand customers better? Specify key challenges and areas for improvement. 

2. Solution vision
• Why is it important to solve the current business problem/use-case? Define 
what success would look like. Specifically, in order to execute a successful 
project, what are the minimum requirements and success criteria?

• Define what decision or business process will be affected by the analytical 
solution. Who will be affected by this tool? Who are the users of this tool? Will 
this impact the marketing department and analysts? Will it impact planning and 
maintenance personnel? Will it impact the claims processing unit of an insurance 
company that is responsible for mitigating fraud?

• How is the ROI of AI and analytics measured? Is there any current method to 
track/benchmark the performance of current business processes and outcomes?

3. Data adequacy
• What data is available? Is it structured or unstructured? Is there data relevant to 
answering the business problem? Example: Operational data is required to predict 
when a machine will fail.

• How much data does the organization have? Where is the data stored? 

• Is data readily accessible for analysis and modelling?



14/14

Copyright © 2021 Open Text. All Rights Reserved. Trademarks owned by Open Text.  
For more information, visit: https://www.opentext.com/about/copyright-information • (23.04.21)17629.EN#

opentext.com/contact

Use-case evaluation worksheet
Section 1: Business knowledge  
               

               

               

               

Section 2: Solution vision 
               

               

               

              

Section 3: Data adequacy 
               

               

               

              

Tips and tricks
• Framing the right business question is key to success.

• Identify what success means and what the end solution will look like at the start. 

• Remember that AI applications have a very different lifecycle—training, testing, 
modelling, experimenting and creating.

• Start small, start early!

• Iterate, iterate, iterate! 

About OpenText
OpenText, The Information Company, enables organizations to gain insight through 
market leading information management solutions, on-premises or in the cloud. For 
more information about OpenText (NASDAQ: OTEX, TSX: OTEX) visit: opentext.com.

Connect with us:
• OpenText CEO Mark Barrenechea’s blog
• Twitter | LinkedIn

 Learn more 
 OpenText™ Magellan™ 

 OpenText™ Magellan™  
 product overview 

 OpenText AI white paper  

 OpenText™ Magellan™ infographic

 Join the conversation

 Keep up to date

 Watch the videos

1	Forbes,	5 Ways AI Is Transforming The Customer Experience,	April	16,	2019.		
2	Gartner,	Gartner Says AI Augmentation Will Create $2.9 Trillion of Business Value in 2021,	August	5,	2019.