














































International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE) 

ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-7, Issue-5C, February 2019    

 

199 

 

Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 

& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: E10480275C19/19©BEIESP 

Abstract--- Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a 

subfield of Artificial Intelligence and getting lot of focus on 

research and development due to emergence of its 

applications. The research areas in focus are conversation 

systems, Language processing, Machine Translation, Deep 

learning. The researches in these areas lead to development of 

many tools to build industrial applications. Combining Deep 

Learning techniques with Natural Language Processing is 

finding lot of applications in domains such as Healthcare, 

Finance, Manufacturing, Education, Retail and customer 

service. This paper provides bird’s view of advancement in 

research, development and application areas of Natural 

Language Processing. This paper captures21research focus 

areas, 22 development tools and 6 domains where Natural 

Language Processing are making rapid advancements. 

Key terms used in this text: NLP, Natural Language 

Processing, Deep Learning, Sentiment Analysis, Question 

Answering, Dialogue Systems, Parsing, Named-Entity 

Recognition, POS Tagging, Chatbots, Human-Computer-

Interface. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Natural Language processing (NLP) is a subfield of 

artificial intelligence dealing with computational 

algorithms to automatically represent and process various 

forms of human (natural) language inputs and 

communicate with Human-Computer-Interface (HCI). It 

is also known by a name “Computational Linguistics”. 

Natural Language Processing involves following 

stages of processing namely, lexical (structure) analysis, 

parsing, semantic analysis, discourse integration, and 

pragmatic analysis. Some well-known application areas 

of NLP are Speech Recognition, Optical Character 

Recognition (OCR), Machine Translation, and Chatbots. 

Recently, Machine Learning algorithms are used to 

process Natural Language input by studying millions of 

examples of text — words, sentences, and paragraphs — 

written by humans. By studying these samples, training 

algorithms gain an understanding of the “context” of 

human speech, writing, and other modes of 

                                                           
Revised Version Manuscript Received on 22 February, 2019 

Krishna Prakash Kalyanathaya, M.Phil, Research Scholar, 

Department of Computer Science, VELS Institute of Science, 
Technology & Advanced Studies, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.                          

(e-mail:krishna.prakash.kk@ gmail.com) 

D. Akila, Associate Professor, Department of Information 
Technology, School of Computing Sciences, VELS Institute of Science, 

Technology & Advanced Studies, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.                     

(e-mail:akiindia@yahoo.com) 
P. Rajesh, Assistant Professor, Department of Information 

Technology, School of Computing Sciences, VELS Institute of Science, 

Technology & Advanced Studies, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.                      
(e-mail:itsrajesh91@gmail.com) 

communication. The machine learning and deep learning 

algorithms are widely is used to develop frameworks for 

NLP and efficiently perform common NLP tasks. 

II. BRIEF HISTORY 

Although the work on NLP dates back to around 1950 

with the development of what is called as “Turing Test” 

and in 1957 a rule based system of syntactic structures. 

The progress was slow until 1990 due to limited 

computational power and systems were based on 

complex sets of hand written rules and limited 

vocabulary. With the introduction of machine learning 

and steady increase in computational power, recently 

interest on research and applications are growing. The 

recent major breakthrough areas of NLP are: speech 

recognition, language processing, dialog systems and 

applying deep learning techniques. 

While NLP is still facing lot of challenges (like human 

computer interfaces), there has been lot of research 

interests and it has opened to many opportunities for 

using the techniques in robotics, automation and digital 

transformation. 

III. RESEARCH WORKS ON NLP 

Until 1990, most of the research work was done on the 

NLP concepts and machine translation. Most recent 

research work on NLP have harnessed the power of 

statistical models, machine learning, Deep learning 

technologies that are using data driven approach. 

The research topics on Natural Language Processing 

sometimes overlap with some artificial intelligence and 

Deep Learning topics. These approaches generally 

adopted recently to perform NLP tasks in most efficient 

way. The ACL 2018 Main Conference invited papers in 

21areas which are Dialogue and Interactive Systems, 

Discourse and Pragmatics, Document Analysis, 

Generation, Information Extraction and Text Mining, 

Linguistic Theories, Cognitive Modeling and 

Psycholinguistics, Machine Learning, Machine 

Translation, Multidisciplinary, Multilinguality, 

Phonology, Morphology and Word Segmentation, 

Question Answering, Resources and Evaluation, 

Sentence-level Semantics, Sentiment Analysis and 

Argument Mining, Social Media, Summarization,  

 

 

Advances in Natural Language Processing – 

A Survey of Current Research Trends, 

Development Tools and Industry 

Applications 
Krishna Prakash Kalyanathaya, D. Akila and P. Rajesh  



International Conference on Advances in Signal Processing, Power, Embedded, Soft Computing, Communication and 

Control Systems (ICSPECS-2019) | 11th & 12th January 2019 | GPREC, Kurnool, A.P. India 

 

200 

Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 

& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: E10480275C19/19©BEIESP 

Tagging, Chunking, Syntax and Parsing, Textual 

Inference and Other Areas of Semantics, Vision, 

Robotics, Multimodal, Grounding and Speech, Word-

level Semantics [3][4]. The conference accepted 258 long 

papers and 156 short papers on the above areas. 

IV. INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS OF 
NLP 

NLP aims to dominate human-to-machine interaction 

to the point where talking to a machine is as easy as 

talking to a human. NLP still continues to harness 

unstructured data and make it meaningful to a machine. 

IDC recently forecasted that the quantity of analyzed data 

by cognitive systems will grow by a factor of 100 to 1.4 

ZB by 2025 impacting thousands of industries and 

companies around the globe [2]. Robotics, health care, 

financial services, connected auto and smart homes are 

some of the sectors that will continue to be advanced by 

NLP.  

One of initial applications of NLP in early years of 

2000 was on machine translation to work as translator 

from one human language to another. But it rapidly found 

its acceptance in customer service industry. Most popular 

application of NLP in customer service is called as 

“Chatbots” or Virtual assistant.  

Industrial applications of NLP can be broadly 

classified into 3 categories:Conversational systems, Text 

Analytics, Machine translation 

A. Conversational Systems 

Conversational system allows us to make the 

conversation with the automated system in a natural 

language via voice or text interface. They help to 

automate the complex workflows in an organization with 

24X7 support to its users.  

Most common type of conversation devices are 

Chatbots and Virtual Assistants. Today, these two 

devices are employed by banks, e-commerce, social 

media and other self service point of sales systems to 

provide various services to their customers. 

B. Text Analytics 

Text Analytics also called as Text mining which aims 

to extract meaningful content from text, either in 

documents, emails or short-form communications such as 

tweets and SMS texts [2]. 

 Most common use cases of text analytics on social 

media analytics. 

C. Machine Translation 

Machine translation is the task of automatically 

translating one natural language into another, preserving 

the meaning of the input text [4].  

Most popular application of machine translation is 

Google translator.  Other machine translation software’s 

are also used in speech translation and teaching. 

Now, we will look at some industrial applications in 

following domain areas: Healthcare, Automotive, 

Finance, Manufacturing, Retail, Education and customer 

service.  

D. Healthcare 

Hospitals are deploying Virtual Assistants developed 

with combination of Natural Language Processing, 

Computer Vision and Machine learning which will 

automatically create and retrieve patient history by 

interacting with the Patients. Virtual Assistant handle 

routine tasks such as scheduling appointments and 

registration of patients. 

E. Automotive 

Self driving cars are one of most significant 

innovations in this field. NLP enables human computer 

interface in what is now called as “in-car assistants” 

which is gaining popularity in the industry. 

F. Finance 

NLP based solutions are developed in applications 

such as credit scoring, sentiment analysis and document 

search. Credit scoring application help the banks and 

financial institutions assess an individual’s 

creditworthiness and provide credit score using NLP and 

machine learning.  In sentiment analysis applications 

automate the tasks of text mining for real time 

information on market from news site and social media 

and then perform document classification and named 

entity recognition to filter out most relevant information 

to the investors needs.In document search applications, 

the banks or financial institutions uses chatbot interface 

that enables its customers to search for information and 

get answers to basic transactional queries. 

G. Manufacturing  

Robotics and Process Automation are two very 

promising applications areas that will employ Natural 

Language Processing capabilities. Using NLP, Robot on 

a manufacturing floor can interact with human operator at 

a remote place and process instructions for assembly and 

movement of machines and products. The industries have 

already begun to use NLP based solution to automate 

their process workflow for improving efficiency of 

operations.  

H. Retail 

Using Natural Language, Computer Vision and 

Machine learning technologies, a Virtual Assistant placed 

in front of the Retail shop can identify and know what 

customer wants and provide them quick information and 

promotional offers. The specialized virtual assistant also 

understand the shoppers comments and complaints 

regarding the products and provide a quick direction for 

resolution. Many e-commerce platforms are currently 

using conversational agents for customer support. 

I. Education 

A combination of Natural Language Processing and 

Computer vision enable a platform to deliver virtual 

classroom for students. We have already seen the digital 

assistants helping students solving the problems from  

 

 

 



International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE) 

ISSN: 2277-3878, Volume-7, Issue-5C, February 2019    

 

201 

 

Published By: 
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 

& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: E10480275C19/19©BEIESP 

expert knowledge available in digital libraries. 

The top vendors delivering NLP solutions are IBM, 

Google, Amazon, Cerner, Nuance Communications and 

Microsoft. 

V. DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORKS 
AND TOOLS FOR NLP 

The development frameworks and tools will help to 

build industrial applications discussed in the previous 

section. There has been numerous development tools 

available today due to significant interest shown by open 

source communities around the world. These frameworks 

and tools provide built in libraries and also customizable 

to adapt specific needs of the industry.  

 
Fig 1: Block representation of stages in the 

development of NLP tools 

Fig 1 shows the block representation of various stages 

in NLP application development. The Natural Language 

acquisition block built with speech processing, Computer 

vision or any data acquisition tools to inject Natural 

language text into the system.  

Table 1: Natural Language Processing Tools 

 
Natural Language representation block uses structured, 

tree or graph models to represent the Natural Language 

understanding. Natural Language database is a repository 

of Natural Language data like MNIST or similar 

databases which are then used by machine learning 

algorithms to perform other NLP tasks. 

This database is accessed by representation and 

transformation blocks to perform their tasks. Natural 

Language transformation will consists of suite of various 

learning, extraction algorithms to extract meaningful 

actions from the NLP tasks. Natural Language 

communication is a presentation of the desired actions as 

an outcome of the NLP tasks. The generated outcome 

may be either in Natural Language or in the form of 

computer action such as robot arm movement. 

The following table gives an overview of the popular 

tools currently available in the market. 

Abbreviations 
1
Common NLP tasks: Lexical analysis, Parsing, 

semantic analysis, POS tags, Chunking, Name Entity 

Recognition (NER), Semantic Role Labeling 

(SRL)and Syntactic parsing. 
2
NLTK: Natural Language Toolkit 

3
UIMA: Unstructured Information Management 

Architecture 
4
GATE: General Architecture for Text Processing 

5
GPL: General Public License 

6
Dynet: Dynamic Neural Network 

7
MALLET: Machine learning for Language Toolkit 

8
LUIS: Language Understanding Intelligent Service 

REFERENCES 

1. Daniel W. Otter, Julian R. Medina, and Jugal K. Kalita. 
2018. A Survey of the Usages of Deep Learning inNatural 
Language Processing. 1, 1 (July 2018), 35 pages. 

2. ROBERT DALE. "The commercial NLP Landscape in 
2017", Article in Natural LanguageEngineering, July2017  

3. ACL 2018: 56
th
 Annual Meeting of Association for 

Computational Linguistics https://acl2018.org 

4. Predictive Analytics Today: 
www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com[accessed in Dec 2018] 

5. Ali Shatnawi, Ghadeer Al-Bdour, Raffi Al-Qurran and 
Mahmoud Al-Ayyoub 2018. A Comparative Study of Open 
Source Deep Learning Frameworks. 2018 9th International 

Conference on Information and Communication Systems 

(ICICS) 
6. Intelligent automation: Making cognitive real Knowledge 

Series I Chapter 2. 2018, EY report.  
7. Jacques Bughin, Eric Hazan, SreeRamaswamy, Michael 

Chui , TeraAllas, Peter Dahlström, Nicolaus Henke, Monica 

Trench,  2017.   MGI ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE THE 
NEXT DIGITAL FRONTIER? McKinsey & Company 

McKinsey & Company report  July 2017 

8. Svetlana Sicular, Kenneth Brant 2018, Hype Cycle for 
ArtificialIntelligence, 2018 Gartner report July 2018. 

9. McCallum, Andrew Kachites.  "MALLET: A Machine 
Learning for Language Toolkit." http://mallet.cs.umass.edu. 
2002. 

10. Quarteroni, Silvia. (2018). Natural Language Processing for 
Industry: ELCA’s experience. Informatik-Spektrum. 41. 
10.1007/s00287-018-1094-1. 

11. Young, Tom &Hazarika, Devamanyu&Poria, Soujanya& 
Cambria, Erik. (2018). Recent Trends in Deep Learning 
Based Natural Language Processing [Review Article]. IEEE 

Computational Intelligence Magazine. 13. 55-75. 

10.1109/MCI.2018.2840738.  
12. Amirhosseini, Mohammad Hossein, Kazemian, Hassan, 

Ouazzane, Karim and Chandler, Chris (2018) Natural 

language processing approach to NLP meta model 
automation. In: International Joint Conference on Neural 

Networks (IJCNN), 8-13 July 2018, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 

 

https://acl2018.org/
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/

